index.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Home
---

# Avishay Tal

<div class="profile-section">
    <img src="{{ '/assets/images/avishay.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="Avishay Tal" class="profile-image">
    <div class="profile-text">
        <p>Hi, I'm Avishay, an Associate Professor at the <a href="https://eecs.berkeley.edu/">Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences</a> at UC Berkeley. I am honored to be part of Berkeley's <a href="http://theory.cs.berkeley.edu/">Theory Group</a>.</p>
    </div>
</div>

### Main Research Interests {#research}

- Computational Complexity,
- Analysis of Boolean Functions,
- Circuit and Formula Lower Bounds,
- Query Complexity,
- Pseudorandomness,
- Computational Learning Theory,
- Quantum Computing,
- Combinatorics, and
- Connections between Algorithms and Lower Bounds.

### Motivating questions that guide my research:

- What is the power and limitations of parallel computation?
- What is the role of randomness in computation?
- What is the role of memory in learning?
- For which tasks do quantum algorithms outperform classical algorithms?

### Short Bio

I received my Ph.D. in 2015 from the Weizmann Institute of Science, under the guidance of [Ran Raz](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~ranraz/). Prior to that, I was an M.Sc. student at the Technion under the guidance of [Amir Shpilka](http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/~shpilka/) until 2012. I held postdoctoral appointments at the [Institute for Advanced Study](https://www.ias.edu/) (hosted by [Avi Wigderson](https://www.math.ias.edu/avi/home)) from 2015 to 2017, [Simons Institute](https://simons.berkeley.edu/) (as part of the [Lower Bounds in Computational Complexity](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/complexity2018) program), and Stanford University (hosted by [Omer Reingold](http://omereingold.wordpress.com/)) from 2017 to 2019. I feel very fortunate to have had Amir, Ran, Avi, and Omer as my mentors. I joined the EECS department at UC Berkeley in 2019.


## Contact Information {#contact}

**Office:** 635 Soda Hall, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley. Berkeley, CA, 94720

**E-mail:** atal "at" berkeley.edu

## Events

Program on [Analysis and TCS : New Frontiers](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/TCS2023) @ The Simons Institute (Summer 2023) -- and its [reunion](https://simons.berkeley.edu/workshops/analysis-tcs-reunion) (July 2024)

[Advances in Boolean Function Analysis Lecture Series](https://simons.berkeley.edu/events/boolean) @ The Simons Institute (Summer 2020)

Workshop on [Derandomizing Space-Bounded Computation](./workshops/stoc-2020/) (Part of STOC 2020)


## Teaching {#teaching}

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/fall-2025/) \- Fall 2025

CS 294-92 - [Analysis of Boolean Functions](./courses/cs294-analysis-of-boolean-functions/spring-2025/) \- Spring 2025

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/fall-2024/) \- Fall 2024

CS 278 - [Computational Complexity Theory](./courses/cs278-complexity-theory/spring-2024/) \- Spring 2024

CS 70 - [Discrete Mathematics and Probability Theory](https://www.eecs70.org/) \- Fall 2023

CS 294-92 - [Analysis of Boolean Functions](./courses/cs294-analysis-of-boolean-functions/spring-2023/) \- Spring 2023

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/fall-2022/) \- Fall 2022

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/spring-2022) \- Spring 2022

CS 294-202 - [Pseudorandomness](./courses/pseudorandomness/fall-2021/) \- Fall 2021

CS 278 - [Computational Complexity Theory](./courses/cs278-complexity-theory/spring-2021/) \- Spring 2021

CS 170 - [Efficient Algorithms and Intractable Problems](https://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs170/fa20/) \- Fall 2020

CS 294-92 - [Analysis of Boolean Functions](./courses/cs294-analysis-of-boolean-functions/spring-2020/) \- Spring 2020

## Program Committees

[FOCS 2019](http://focs2019.cs.jhu.edu/),  
[SODA 2020](https://www.siam.org/conferences/cm/conference/soda20),  
[CCC 2020](https://www.computationalcomplexity.org/Archive/2020/cfp.php),  
[RANDOM 2020](https://randomconference.com/random-2020-home/),  
[ITCS 2021](http://itcs-conf.org/),  
[STOC 2021](http://acm-stoc.org/stoc2021/), 
[ITCS 2023](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs23/itcs23-cfp.html), 
[STOC 2024](http://acm-stoc.org/stoc2024/), 
[ITCS 2025](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs25/itcs25-cfp.html), 
[CCC 2025](https://computationalcomplexity.org/Archive/2025/cfp.html), 
[FOCS 2025](https://focs.computer.org/2025/)

## Group Information {#students}

### Current Ph.D. Students

- [Zoë Bell](https://sites.google.com/berkeley.edu/zoebell/) (co-advised with [Shafi Goldwasser](http://people.csail.mit.edu/shafi/)
- [Xin Lyu](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~xinlyu/) (co-advised with [Jelani Nelson](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~minilek/))
- [Hongxun Wu](https://whxwhx.github.io/publications/) (co-advised with [Jelani Nelson](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~minilek/))
- [Yichuan Wang](https://wyc908.github.io/) (co-advised with [Lijie Chen](https://chen-lijie.github.io/))


### Former Students

- [Michael Whitmeyer](https://mwhitmeyer.github.io/) \- M.Sc. - now PhD @ UW
- [Vishnu Iyer](https://vishnuiyer.org/) \- Undergraduate researcher - now PhD @ UT Austin
- [Nagaganesh Jaladanki](https://nagaganesh.com/) \- M.Sc.
- [Kewen Wu](https://shlw.github.io/) \- PhD 2025 - now postdoc at IAS
- [Orr Paradise](http://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~orrp/) \- PhD 2025 (co-advised with [Shafi Goldwasser](http://people.csail.mit.edu/shafi/)) \- now postdoc at EPFL.

### Former Postdocs

- [William M. Hoza](https://williamhoza.com/tcs/) \- Simons-Berkeley postdoc (now Faculty at U Chicago)
- [Makrand Sinha](https://makrandsinha.github.io/) \- Simons-Berkeley postdoc (now Faculty at UIUC)
- [Lijie Chen](https://www.mit.edu/~lijieche/) \- Miller Fellow (now Faculty at UC Berkeley)


## Publications {#publications}

1. ***Quantum Computable One-Way Functions without One-Way Functions***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02554) joint with William Kretschmer and Luowen Qian\
   QIP, 2025. STOC, 2025.
   
1. ***The Power of Adaptivity in Quantum Query Algorithms***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16057) joint with Uma Girish, Makrand Sinha, and Kewen Wu\
   Presented at the 27th Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2024).\
   STOC, 2024.
   
1. ***Tight Time-Space Lower Bounds for Constant-Pass Learning***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08070) joint with Xin Lyu, Hongxun Wu, and Junzhao Yang\
   FOCS, 2023.
   
1. ***Weighted Pseudorandom Generators via Inverse Analysis of Random Walks and Shortcutting***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2023/114/) [William@IAS](https://youtu.be/Xkxrh1aRdyE?si=AinojVda9r5fOOmz) joint with Lijie Chen, William Hoza, Xin Lyu, and Hongxun Wu\
   FOCS, 2023.
   
1. ***Fourier Growth of Communication Protocols for XOR Functions***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13926) joint with Uma Girish, Makrand Sinha, and Kewen Wu\
   FOCS, 2023.
   
1. ***New PRGs for Unbounded-Width/Adaptive-Order Read-Once Branching Programs***\
   [PDF](https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.39) joint with Lijie Chen, Xin Lyu, and Hongxun Wu\
   ICALP, 2023.
   
1. ***Quantum Cryptography in Algorithmica***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00879) joint with William Kretschmer, Luowen Qian, and Makrand Sinha.\
   Presented at the 26th Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2023).\
   STOC, 2023.
   
1. ***Depth-d Threshold Circuits vs. Depth-(d+1) AND-OR Trees***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2022/087/) joint with Pooya Hatami, William Hoza, and Roei Tell.\
   STOC, 2023.
   
1. ***On Certified Randomness from Quantum Advantage Experiments***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.14846) joint with Roozbeh Bassirian, Adam Bouland, Bill Fefferman, and Sam Gunn.
   
1. ***Fourier Growth of Parity Decision Trees***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/046/) joint with Uma Girish and Kewen Wu.\
   CCC, 2021.
   
1. ***Pseudorandom Generators for Read-Once Monotone Branching Programs***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/018/) joint with Dean Doron, Raghu Meka, Omer Reingold, and Salil Vadhan.\
   RANDOM, 2021.
   
1. ***Fooling Constant-Depth Threshold Circuits***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/002/) joint with Pooya Hatami, William Hoza, and Roei Tell.\
   FOCS, 2021.

1. ***Junta Distance Approximation with Sub-Exponential Queries***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/004/) joint with Vishnu Iyer and Michael Whitmeyer.\
   CCC, 2021.

1. ***Shrinkage under Random Projections, and Cubic Formula Lower Bounds for AC0***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2020/180/) joint with Yuval Filmus and Or Meir.\
   ITCS, 2021.

1. ***Degree vs. Approximate Degree and Quantum Implications of Huang's Sensitivity Theorem***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.12629) joint with Scott Aaronson, Shalev Ben-David, Robin Kothari, and Shravas Rao.\
   (Subsumes an earlier version named "Quantum Implications of Huang's Sensitivity Theorem")\
   Presented at the 24th Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2021)as a short plenary talk.\
   STOC, 2021.

1. ***Rigid Matrices From Rectangular PCPs***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2020/075/) [Prahladh@IAS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yNDSkPDlMnE) joint with Amey Bhangale, Prahladh Harsha, and Orr Paradise.\
   FOCS, 2020. SICOMP, 2024.

1. ***Towards Optimal Separations between Quantum and Randomized Query Complexities***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/179/) [FOCS Long Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VYmxY6zLy1I)\
   FOCS, 2020.

1. ***Quantum versus Randomized Communication Complexity, with Efficient Players***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/152/) joint with Uma Girish and Ran Raz.\
   Presented at the 23rd Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2020).\
   ITCS, 2021. Computational Complexity Journal 2022.

1. ***On the Computational Power of Radio Channels***\
   [PDF](https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/frontdoor.php?source_opus=11315) joint with Mark Braverman, Gillat Kol, and Rotem Oshman.\
   DISC, 2019.

1. ***Time-Space Lower Bounds for Two-Pass Learning***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/071/) joint with Sumegha Garg and Ran Raz.\
   CCC, 2019.

1. AC0\[p\] Lower Bounds against MCSP via the Coin Problem\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/018/) joint with Alexander Golovnev, Rahul Ilango, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Antonina Kolokolova.\
   ICALP, 2019.

1. ***Oracle Separation of BQP and PH***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/107/) joint with Ran Raz.\
   STOC, 2019. (Best Paper Award). JACM, 2022.\
   Presented at the 22nd Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2019) as a plenary talk.\
   [\[Computational Complexity Blog\]](https://blog.computationalcomplexity.org/2018/06/bqp-not-in-polynomial-time-hierarchy-in.html) [\[Shtetl-Optimized\]](https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=3827) [\[Windows on Theory\]](https://windowsontheory.org/2018/06/17/on-the-raz-tal-oracle-separation-of-bqp-and-ph/) [\[New Scientist\]](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2170746-quantum-computers-are-weirder-and-more-powerful-than-we-thought/) [\[Quanta\]](https://www.quantamagazine.org/finally-a-problem-that-only-quantum-computers-will-ever-be-able-to-solve-20180621/) [\[The Hindu\]](https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/quantum-computers-have-an-edge-over-classical-ones-says-the-oracle/article24420375.ece) [\[CACM\]](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2019/1/233514-quantum-leap/fulltext) [\[Nature\]](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07801-3) [Video](http://www.birs.ca/events/2018/5-day-workshops/18w5197/videos/watch/201808161505-Tal.html?jwsource=cl) (CMO Oaxaca) [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUGr7mO-tM0) (IAS)

1. ***Exponential separation between shallow quantum circuits and unbounded fan-in shallow classical circuits***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/089/) joint with Adam Bene Watts, Robin Kothari, and Luke Schaeffer.\
   STOC, 2019.\
   Presented at the 22nd Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2019).

1. ***Pseudorandom Generators for Width-3 Branching Programs***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/112/) joint with Raghu Meka and Omer Reingold.\
   STOC, 2019.\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/249.html)

1. ***Pseudorandom generators from the second Fourier level and applications to AC0 with parity gates***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/155/) joint with Eshan Chattopadhyay, Pooya Hatami, and Shachar Lovett.\
   ITCS, 2019.

1. ***Cubic Formula Size Lower Bounds Based on Compositions with Majority***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/160/) joint with Anna Gal and Adrian Trejo Nuñez.\
   ITCS, 2019.

1. ***Improved Pseudorandomness for Unordered Branching Programs through Local Monotonicity***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/171/) joint with Eshan Chattopadhyay, Pooya Hatami and Omer Reingold.\
   STOC, 2018.

1. ***Extractor-Based Time-Space Lower Bounds for Learning***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02639) joint with Sumegha Garg and Ran Raz.\
   STOC, 2018.

1. ***On Constant-Depth Canonical Boolean Circuits for Computing Multilinear Functions***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/193/) joint with Oded Goldreich.\
   Book chapter in "Computational Complexity and Property Testing", 2020.

1. ***The Choice and Agreement Problems of a Random Function***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/148/) joint with Or Meir.\
   Information Processing Letters, Volume 133, 2018.

1. ***Pseudorandom Generators for Low Sensitivity Functions***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/025/) joint with Pooya Hatami.\
   ITCS, 2018.

1. ***Robust Sensitivity***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/161/) joint with Shachar Lovett and Jiapeng Zhang.\
   SODA, 2018.

1. ***Lower Bounds for 2-Query LCCs over Large Alphabet***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.06980) joint with Arnab Bhattacharyya and Sivakanth Gopi.\
   RANDOM, 2017.

1. ***Tight Bounds on The Fourier Spectrum of AC0***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2014/174/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1G0WNtCM1Sum4Y8hgvWwgQ69xBWnknDjD)\
   CCC, 2017.\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/171.html)

1. ***The Bipartite Formula Complexity of Inner-Product is Quadratic***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/181/)\
   STOC, 2017 (merged with "Computing Requires Larger Formulas than Approximating").

1. ***Computing Requires Larger Formulas than Approximating***
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/179/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Ea_4PmfZZ8eoUdvpONVczvoDVxYhDv4W) [TCS+ Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=auT6ckYVnuo)\
   STOC, 2017 (merged with "The Bipartite Formula Complexity of Inner-Product is Quadratic").\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/211.html)

1. ***Time-Space Hardness of Learning Sparse Parities***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/113/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1sP0eGuXN3Nt71mEStlEEZg89JOQ0ErDL)
   joint with Gillat Kol and Ran Raz.\
   STOC, 2017.

1. ***Low-Sensitivity Functions from Unambiguous Certificates***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.07084) joint with Shalev Ben-David and Pooya Hatami.\
   ITCS, 2017.

1. ***Degree and Sensitivity: Tails of Two Distributions***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/069/) joint with Parikshit Gopalan, Rocco Servedio, and Avi Wigderson.\
   (a preliminary version of this paper by Gopalan, Servedio, and Wigderson appeared in CCC, 2016).

1. ***On the Sensitivity Conjecture***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/062/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1BdAWdGVJ8pHSFWMrnEolI28fJD6eWD3S)\
   ICALP, 2016.

1. ***#SAT Algorithms from Shrinkage***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2015/114/)

1. ***Matrix Rigidity of Random Toeplitz Matrices***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2015/079/) [Journal-version](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00037-016-0144-9) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1-KKRtzK23H1mJ7_LgBqwJUdbytG9J1_I) (STOC) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=18eMjO5qHg84CP-GS0LBK139Qf-z3ZH54) (longer version)
   joint with Oded Goldreich.\
   STOC, 2016. Computational Complexity, 2016.

1. ***Shrinkage of De Morgan Formulae by Spectral Techniques***
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2014/048/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1-DncCQYfvree-R6LFd9nA87_b6g_WuaA)\
   FOCS, 2014.

1. ***On Fractional Block Sensitivity***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/168/) [Journal-version](http://cjtcs.cs.uchicago.edu/articles/2016/8/contents.html) joint with Raghav Kulkarni.\
   CJTCS, 2016.

1. ***Two Structural Results for Low Degree Polynomials and Applications***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/145) [Video](http://video.ias.edu/csdm/2014/0310-AvistayTal) (IAS) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1kMMpzUfoaz5ccguDIlZeIp0JLzSjCcWP) (RANDOM)\
    joint with Gil Cohen.\
    RANDOM, 2015.\
    An [implementation](./structural.py/) of the algorithm suggested in Theorem 4.1.

1. ***On the Structure of Boolean Functions with Small Spectral Norm***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/049/) joint with Amir Shpilka and Ben lee Volk.\
    ITCS, 2014. Computational Complexity Journal, 2015.

1. ***Improved Average-Case Lower Bounds for De Morgan Formula Size***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/058/) [Journal-version](http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/15M1048045) [Slides](http://demorgan.pptx/) joint with Ilan Komargodski and Ran Raz.\
   FOCS, 2013. SICOMP, 2017.

1. ***Properties and Applications of Boolean Function Composition***\
   [PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=12Vn3BT2ByZCFnEH0zlzkWGTxlx_N9Rw6) [Slides](http://bfc0308.pptx/)\
   ITCS, 2013. (Best Student Paper)\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/131.html)

1. ***On the Degree of Univariate Polynomials Over the Integers***\
   [PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1TqNuAmq1pb_hA3h-Q2b9gfWA3TaMwW8V) [Journal-version](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1CFoAfT8dbhIN8_k8UaxQrdHlDkbBgjwv) joint with Gil Cohen and Amir Shpilka.\
   ITCS, 2012. Combinatorica, 2016.

1. ***On The Minimal Fourier Degree of Symmetric Boolean Functions***\
   [PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=16mFZro6N8VD_rwoZYWbHeB_ZuspLf5ZS) [Journal-version](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1eAO3u3BtxRtMcAm0GapJbx6NRDCUg8W6) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1lZf2UermOAVsurgYqtzJxc64XFsCSJD3) [Amir@MSR](http://research.microsoft.com/apps/video/dl.aspx?id=145593) joint with Amir Shpilka.\
   CCC, 2011. Combinatorica, 2014.\
   [\[Richard Lipton's Blog Post\]](https://rjlipton.wordpress.com/2010/11/19/is-complexity-theory-on-the-brink/) [\[2\]](https://rjlipton.wordpress.com/2011/01/05/fourier-complexity-of-cirtemmys-boolean-functions/)

Commit message:

Add Swiss Winter School on Theoretical Computer Science event

index.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Home
---

# Avishay Tal

<div class="profile-section">
    <img src="{{ '/assets/images/avishay.jpg' | relative_url }}" alt="Avishay Tal" class="profile-image">
    <div class="profile-text">
        <p>Hi, I'm Avishay, an Associate Professor at the <a href="https://eecs.berkeley.edu/">Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences</a> at UC Berkeley. I am honored to be part of Berkeley's <a href="http://theory.cs.berkeley.edu/">Theory Group</a>.</p>
    </div>
</div>

### Main Research Interests {#research}

- Computational Complexity,
- Analysis of Boolean Functions,
- Circuit and Formula Lower Bounds,
- Query Complexity,
- Pseudorandomness,
- Computational Learning Theory,
- Quantum Computing,
- Combinatorics, and
- Connections between Algorithms and Lower Bounds.

### Motivating questions that guide my research:

- What is the power and limitations of parallel computation?
- What is the role of randomness in computation?
- What is the role of memory in learning?
- For which tasks do quantum algorithms outperform classical algorithms?

### Short Bio

I received my Ph.D. in 2015 from the Weizmann Institute of Science, under the guidance of [Ran Raz](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~ranraz/). Prior to that, I was an M.Sc. student at the Technion under the guidance of [Amir Shpilka](http://www.cs.tau.ac.il/~shpilka/) until 2012. I held postdoctoral appointments at the [Institute for Advanced Study](https://www.ias.edu/) (hosted by [Avi Wigderson](https://www.math.ias.edu/avi/home)) from 2015 to 2017, [Simons Institute](https://simons.berkeley.edu/) (as part of the [Lower Bounds in Computational Complexity](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/complexity2018) program), and Stanford University (hosted by [Omer Reingold](http://omereingold.wordpress.com/)) from 2017 to 2019. I feel very fortunate to have had Amir, Ran, Avi, and Omer as my mentors. I joined the EECS department at UC Berkeley in 2019.


## Contact Information {#contact}

**Office:** 635 Soda Hall, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, UC Berkeley. Berkeley, CA, 94720

**E-mail:** atal "at" berkeley.edu

## Events

Program on [Pseudorandomness & High-Dimensional Expansion](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/pseudorandomness-high-dimensional-expansion) @ The Simons Institute (Fall 2026)

[Swiss Winter School on Theoretical Computer Science](https://theory.epfl.ch/WinterSchool2026/) @ EPFL/ETH Zurich (January 25-30, 2026) 

Program on [Analysis and TCS : New Frontiers](https://simons.berkeley.edu/programs/TCS2023) @ The Simons Institute (Summer 2023) -- and its [reunion](https://simons.berkeley.edu/workshops/analysis-tcs-reunion) (July 2024)

[Advances in Boolean Function Analysis Lecture Series](https://simons.berkeley.edu/events/boolean) @ The Simons Institute (Summer 2020)

Workshop on [Derandomizing Space-Bounded Computation](./workshops/stoc-2020/) (Part of STOC 2020)


## Teaching {#teaching}

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/fall-2025/) \- Fall 2025

CS 294-92 - [Analysis of Boolean Functions](./courses/cs294-analysis-of-boolean-functions/spring-2025/) \- Spring 2025

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/fall-2024/) \- Fall 2024

CS 278 - [Computational Complexity Theory](./courses/cs278-complexity-theory/spring-2024/) \- Spring 2024

CS 70 - [Discrete Mathematics and Probability Theory](https://www.eecs70.org/) \- Fall 2023

CS 294-92 - [Analysis of Boolean Functions](./courses/cs294-analysis-of-boolean-functions/spring-2023/) \- Spring 2023

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/fall-2022/) \- Fall 2022

CS 172 - [Computability and Complexity](./courses/cs172-computability-and-complexity/spring-2022) \- Spring 2022

CS 294-202 - [Pseudorandomness](./courses/pseudorandomness/fall-2021/) \- Fall 2021

CS 278 - [Computational Complexity Theory](./courses/cs278-complexity-theory/spring-2021/) \- Spring 2021

CS 170 - [Efficient Algorithms and Intractable Problems](https://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/~cs170/fa20/) \- Fall 2020

CS 294-92 - [Analysis of Boolean Functions](./courses/cs294-analysis-of-boolean-functions/spring-2020/) \- Spring 2020

## Program Committees

[FOCS 2019](http://focs2019.cs.jhu.edu/),  
[SODA 2020](https://www.siam.org/conferences/cm/conference/soda20),  
[CCC 2020](https://www.computationalcomplexity.org/Archive/2020/cfp.php),  
[RANDOM 2020](https://randomconference.com/random-2020-home/),  
[ITCS 2021](http://itcs-conf.org/),  
[STOC 2021](http://acm-stoc.org/stoc2021/), 
[ITCS 2023](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs23/itcs23-cfp.html), 
[STOC 2024](http://acm-stoc.org/stoc2024/), 
[ITCS 2025](http://itcs-conf.org/itcs25/itcs25-cfp.html), 
[CCC 2025](https://computationalcomplexity.org/Archive/2025/cfp.html), 
[FOCS 2025](https://focs.computer.org/2025/)

## Group Information {#students}

### Current Ph.D. Students

- [Zoë Bell](https://sites.google.com/berkeley.edu/zoebell/) (co-advised with [Shafi Goldwasser](http://people.csail.mit.edu/shafi/)
- [Xin Lyu](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~xinlyu/) (co-advised with [Jelani Nelson](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~minilek/))
- [Hongxun Wu](https://whxwhx.github.io/publications/) (co-advised with [Jelani Nelson](https://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~minilek/))
- [Yichuan Wang](https://wyc908.github.io/) (co-advised with [Lijie Chen](https://chen-lijie.github.io/))


### Former Students

- [Michael Whitmeyer](https://mwhitmeyer.github.io/) \- M.Sc. - now PhD @ UW
- [Vishnu Iyer](https://vishnuiyer.org/) \- Undergraduate researcher - now PhD @ UT Austin
- [Nagaganesh Jaladanki](https://nagaganesh.com/) \- M.Sc.
- [Kewen Wu](https://shlw.github.io/) \- PhD 2025 - now postdoc at IAS
- [Orr Paradise](http://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/~orrp/) \- PhD 2025 (co-advised with [Shafi Goldwasser](http://people.csail.mit.edu/shafi/)) \- now postdoc at EPFL.

### Former Postdocs

- [William M. Hoza](https://williamhoza.com/tcs/) \- Simons-Berkeley postdoc (now Faculty at U Chicago)
- [Makrand Sinha](https://makrandsinha.github.io/) \- Simons-Berkeley postdoc (now Faculty at UIUC)
- [Lijie Chen](https://www.mit.edu/~lijieche/) \- Miller Fellow (now Faculty at UC Berkeley)


## Publications {#publications}

1. ***Quantum Computable One-Way Functions without One-Way Functions***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.02554) joint with William Kretschmer and Luowen Qian\
   QIP, 2025. STOC, 2025.
   
1. ***The Power of Adaptivity in Quantum Query Algorithms***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.16057) joint with Uma Girish, Makrand Sinha, and Kewen Wu\
   Presented at the 27th Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2024).\
   STOC, 2024.
   
1. ***Tight Time-Space Lower Bounds for Constant-Pass Learning***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08070) joint with Xin Lyu, Hongxun Wu, and Junzhao Yang\
   FOCS, 2023.
   
1. ***Weighted Pseudorandom Generators via Inverse Analysis of Random Walks and Shortcutting***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2023/114/) [William@IAS](https://youtu.be/Xkxrh1aRdyE?si=AinojVda9r5fOOmz) joint with Lijie Chen, William Hoza, Xin Lyu, and Hongxun Wu\
   FOCS, 2023.
   
1. ***Fourier Growth of Communication Protocols for XOR Functions***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.13926) joint with Uma Girish, Makrand Sinha, and Kewen Wu\
   FOCS, 2023.
   
1. ***New PRGs for Unbounded-Width/Adaptive-Order Read-Once Branching Programs***\
   [PDF](https://drops.dagstuhl.de/entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2023.39) joint with Lijie Chen, Xin Lyu, and Hongxun Wu\
   ICALP, 2023.
   
1. ***Quantum Cryptography in Algorithmica***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.00879) joint with William Kretschmer, Luowen Qian, and Makrand Sinha.\
   Presented at the 26th Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2023).\
   STOC, 2023.
   
1. ***Depth-d Threshold Circuits vs. Depth-(d+1) AND-OR Trees***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2022/087/) joint with Pooya Hatami, William Hoza, and Roei Tell.\
   STOC, 2023.
   
1. ***On Certified Randomness from Quantum Advantage Experiments***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.14846) joint with Roozbeh Bassirian, Adam Bouland, Bill Fefferman, and Sam Gunn.
   
1. ***Fourier Growth of Parity Decision Trees***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/046/) joint with Uma Girish and Kewen Wu.\
   CCC, 2021.
   
1. ***Pseudorandom Generators for Read-Once Monotone Branching Programs***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/018/) joint with Dean Doron, Raghu Meka, Omer Reingold, and Salil Vadhan.\
   RANDOM, 2021.
   
1. ***Fooling Constant-Depth Threshold Circuits***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/002/) joint with Pooya Hatami, William Hoza, and Roei Tell.\
   FOCS, 2021.

1. ***Junta Distance Approximation with Sub-Exponential Queries***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2021/004/) joint with Vishnu Iyer and Michael Whitmeyer.\
   CCC, 2021.

1. ***Shrinkage under Random Projections, and Cubic Formula Lower Bounds for AC0***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2020/180/) joint with Yuval Filmus and Or Meir.\
   ITCS, 2021.

1. ***Degree vs. Approximate Degree and Quantum Implications of Huang's Sensitivity Theorem***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.12629) joint with Scott Aaronson, Shalev Ben-David, Robin Kothari, and Shravas Rao.\
   (Subsumes an earlier version named "Quantum Implications of Huang's Sensitivity Theorem")\
   Presented at the 24th Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2021)as a short plenary talk.\
   STOC, 2021.

1. ***Rigid Matrices From Rectangular PCPs***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2020/075/) [Prahladh@IAS](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yNDSkPDlMnE) joint with Amey Bhangale, Prahladh Harsha, and Orr Paradise.\
   FOCS, 2020. SICOMP, 2024.

1. ***Towards Optimal Separations between Quantum and Randomized Query Complexities***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/179/) [FOCS Long Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VYmxY6zLy1I)\
   FOCS, 2020.

1. ***Quantum versus Randomized Communication Complexity, with Efficient Players***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/152/) joint with Uma Girish and Ran Raz.\
   Presented at the 23rd Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2020).\
   ITCS, 2021. Computational Complexity Journal 2022.

1. ***On the Computational Power of Radio Channels***\
   [PDF](https://drops.dagstuhl.de/opus/frontdoor.php?source_opus=11315) joint with Mark Braverman, Gillat Kol, and Rotem Oshman.\
   DISC, 2019.

1. ***Time-Space Lower Bounds for Two-Pass Learning***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/071/) joint with Sumegha Garg and Ran Raz.\
   CCC, 2019.

1. AC0\[p\] Lower Bounds against MCSP via the Coin Problem\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/018/) joint with Alexander Golovnev, Rahul Ilango, Russell Impagliazzo, Valentine Kabanets, and Antonina Kolokolova.\
   ICALP, 2019.

1. ***Oracle Separation of BQP and PH***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/107/) joint with Ran Raz.\
   STOC, 2019. (Best Paper Award). JACM, 2022.\
   Presented at the 22nd Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2019) as a plenary talk.\
   [\[Computational Complexity Blog\]](https://blog.computationalcomplexity.org/2018/06/bqp-not-in-polynomial-time-hierarchy-in.html) [\[Shtetl-Optimized\]](https://www.scottaaronson.com/blog/?p=3827) [\[Windows on Theory\]](https://windowsontheory.org/2018/06/17/on-the-raz-tal-oracle-separation-of-bqp-and-ph/) [\[New Scientist\]](https://www.newscientist.com/article/2170746-quantum-computers-are-weirder-and-more-powerful-than-we-thought/) [\[Quanta\]](https://www.quantamagazine.org/finally-a-problem-that-only-quantum-computers-will-ever-be-able-to-solve-20180621/) [\[The Hindu\]](https://www.thehindu.com/sci-tech/science/quantum-computers-have-an-edge-over-classical-ones-says-the-oracle/article24420375.ece) [\[CACM\]](http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2019/1/233514-quantum-leap/fulltext) [\[Nature\]](https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-018-07801-3) [Video](http://www.birs.ca/events/2018/5-day-workshops/18w5197/videos/watch/201808161505-Tal.html?jwsource=cl) (CMO Oaxaca) [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUGr7mO-tM0) (IAS)

1. ***Exponential separation between shallow quantum circuits and unbounded fan-in shallow classical circuits***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2019/089/) joint with Adam Bene Watts, Robin Kothari, and Luke Schaeffer.\
   STOC, 2019.\
   Presented at the 22nd Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP 2019).

1. ***Pseudorandom Generators for Width-3 Branching Programs***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/112/) joint with Raghu Meka and Omer Reingold.\
   STOC, 2019.\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/249.html)

1. ***Pseudorandom generators from the second Fourier level and applications to AC0 with parity gates***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/155/) joint with Eshan Chattopadhyay, Pooya Hatami, and Shachar Lovett.\
   ITCS, 2019.

1. ***Cubic Formula Size Lower Bounds Based on Compositions with Majority***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2018/160/) joint with Anna Gal and Adrian Trejo Nuñez.\
   ITCS, 2019.

1. ***Improved Pseudorandomness for Unordered Branching Programs through Local Monotonicity***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/171/) joint with Eshan Chattopadhyay, Pooya Hatami and Omer Reingold.\
   STOC, 2018.

1. ***Extractor-Based Time-Space Lower Bounds for Learning***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1708.02639) joint with Sumegha Garg and Ran Raz.\
   STOC, 2018.

1. ***On Constant-Depth Canonical Boolean Circuits for Computing Multilinear Functions***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/193/) joint with Oded Goldreich.\
   Book chapter in "Computational Complexity and Property Testing", 2020.

1. ***The Choice and Agreement Problems of a Random Function***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/148/) joint with Or Meir.\
   Information Processing Letters, Volume 133, 2018.

1. ***Pseudorandom Generators for Low Sensitivity Functions***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2017/025/) joint with Pooya Hatami.\
   ITCS, 2018.

1. ***Robust Sensitivity***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/161/) joint with Shachar Lovett and Jiapeng Zhang.\
   SODA, 2018.

1. ***Lower Bounds for 2-Query LCCs over Large Alphabet***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.06980) joint with Arnab Bhattacharyya and Sivakanth Gopi.\
   RANDOM, 2017.

1. ***Tight Bounds on The Fourier Spectrum of AC0***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2014/174/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1G0WNtCM1Sum4Y8hgvWwgQ69xBWnknDjD)\
   CCC, 2017.\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/171.html)

1. ***The Bipartite Formula Complexity of Inner-Product is Quadratic***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/181/)\
   STOC, 2017 (merged with "Computing Requires Larger Formulas than Approximating").

1. ***Computing Requires Larger Formulas than Approximating***
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/179/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1Ea_4PmfZZ8eoUdvpONVczvoDVxYhDv4W) [TCS+ Talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=auT6ckYVnuo)\
   STOC, 2017 (merged with "The Bipartite Formula Complexity of Inner-Product is Quadratic").\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/211.html)

1. ***Time-Space Hardness of Learning Sparse Parities***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/113/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1sP0eGuXN3Nt71mEStlEEZg89JOQ0ErDL)
   joint with Gillat Kol and Ran Raz.\
   STOC, 2017.

1. ***Low-Sensitivity Functions from Unambiguous Certificates***\
   [PDF](https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.07084) joint with Shalev Ben-David and Pooya Hatami.\
   ITCS, 2017.

1. ***Degree and Sensitivity: Tails of Two Distributions***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/069/) joint with Parikshit Gopalan, Rocco Servedio, and Avi Wigderson.\
   (a preliminary version of this paper by Gopalan, Servedio, and Wigderson appeared in CCC, 2016).

1. ***On the Sensitivity Conjecture***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2016/062/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1BdAWdGVJ8pHSFWMrnEolI28fJD6eWD3S)\
   ICALP, 2016.

1. ***#SAT Algorithms from Shrinkage***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2015/114/)

1. ***Matrix Rigidity of Random Toeplitz Matrices***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2015/079/) [Journal-version](http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00037-016-0144-9) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1-KKRtzK23H1mJ7_LgBqwJUdbytG9J1_I) (STOC) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=18eMjO5qHg84CP-GS0LBK139Qf-z3ZH54) (longer version)
   joint with Oded Goldreich.\
   STOC, 2016. Computational Complexity, 2016.

1. ***Shrinkage of De Morgan Formulae by Spectral Techniques***
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2014/048/) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1-DncCQYfvree-R6LFd9nA87_b6g_WuaA)\
   FOCS, 2014.

1. ***On Fractional Block Sensitivity***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/168/) [Journal-version](http://cjtcs.cs.uchicago.edu/articles/2016/8/contents.html) joint with Raghav Kulkarni.\
   CJTCS, 2016.

1. ***Two Structural Results for Low Degree Polynomials and Applications***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/145) [Video](http://video.ias.edu/csdm/2014/0310-AvistayTal) (IAS) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1kMMpzUfoaz5ccguDIlZeIp0JLzSjCcWP) (RANDOM)\
    joint with Gil Cohen.\
    RANDOM, 2015.\
    An [implementation](./structural.py/) of the algorithm suggested in Theorem 4.1.

1. ***On the Structure of Boolean Functions with Small Spectral Norm***\
   [PDF](http://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/049/) joint with Amir Shpilka and Ben lee Volk.\
    ITCS, 2014. Computational Complexity Journal, 2015.

1. ***Improved Average-Case Lower Bounds for De Morgan Formula Size***\
   [PDF](https://eccc.weizmann.ac.il/report/2013/058/) [Journal-version](http://dx.doi.org/10.1137/15M1048045) [Slides](http://demorgan.pptx/) joint with Ilan Komargodski and Ran Raz.\
   FOCS, 2013. SICOMP, 2017.

1. ***Properties and Applications of Boolean Function Composition***\
   [PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=12Vn3BT2ByZCFnEH0zlzkWGTxlx_N9Rw6) [Slides](http://bfc0308.pptx/)\
   ITCS, 2013. (Best Student Paper)\
   [\[Oded's choices\]](http://www.wisdom.weizmann.ac.il/~oded/MC/131.html)

1. ***On the Degree of Univariate Polynomials Over the Integers***\
   [PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1TqNuAmq1pb_hA3h-Q2b9gfWA3TaMwW8V) [Journal-version](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1CFoAfT8dbhIN8_k8UaxQrdHlDkbBgjwv) joint with Gil Cohen and Amir Shpilka.\
   ITCS, 2012. Combinatorica, 2016.

1. ***On The Minimal Fourier Degree of Symmetric Boolean Functions***\
   [PDF](https://drive.google.com/open?id=16mFZro6N8VD_rwoZYWbHeB_ZuspLf5ZS) [Journal-version](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1eAO3u3BtxRtMcAm0GapJbx6NRDCUg8W6) [Slides](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1lZf2UermOAVsurgYqtzJxc64XFsCSJD3) [Amir@MSR](http://research.microsoft.com/apps/video/dl.aspx?id=145593) joint with Amir Shpilka.\
   CCC, 2011. Combinatorica, 2014.\
   [\[Richard Lipton's Blog Post\]](https://rjlipton.wordpress.com/2010/11/19/is-complexity-theory-on-the-brink/) [\[2\]](https://rjlipton.wordpress.com/2011/01/05/fourier-complexity-of-cirtemmys-boolean-functions/)
